README.rst, before:

======
modulo
======

Pure-Python library for working with modular arithmetic, congruence classes, and finite fields.

|pypi| |readthedocs| |actions| |coveralls|

.. |pypi| image:: https://badge.fury.io/py/modulo.svg
   :target: https://badge.fury.io/py/modulo
   :alt: PyPI version and link.

.. |readthedocs| image:: https://readthedocs.org/projects/modulo-lib/badge/?version=latest
   :target: https://modulo-lib.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest
   :alt: Read the Docs documentation status.

.. |actions| image:: https://github.com/lapets/modulo/workflows/lint-test-cover-docs/badge.svg
   :target: https://github.com/lapets/modulo/actions/workflows/lint-test-cover-docs.yml
   :alt: GitHub Actions status.

.. |coveralls| image:: https://coveralls.io/repos/github/lapets/modulo/badge.svg?branch=main
   :target: https://coveralls.io/github/lapets/modulo?branch=main
   :alt: Coveralls test coverage summary.

Purpose
-------
The library allows users to work with congruence classes (including finite field elements) as objects, with support for many common operations.

Package Installation and Usage
------------------------------
This library is available as a `package on PyPI <https://pypi.org/project/modulo>`__::

    python -m pip install modulo

The library can be imported in the usual way::

    from modulo import modulo

Examples
^^^^^^^^
This library makes it possible to work with `congruence classes <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Congruence_relation>`__ (and sets of congruence classes such as finite fields) as objects. A congruence class is defined using a representative integer and a modulus::

    >>> from modulo import modulo
    >>> modulo(3, 7)
    modulo(3, 7)

Built-in operators can be used to perform modular addition, modular subtraction, and modular negation of congruence classes::

    >>> modulo(3, 7) + modulo(5, 7)
    modulo(1, 7)
    >>> modulo(1, 7) - modulo(4, 7)
    modulo(4, 7)
    >>> -modulo(5, 7)
    modulo(2, 7)

Modular multiplication, division, inversion, and exponentiation are also supported (when they are defined)::

    >>> modulo(3, 7) * modulo(5, 7)
    modulo(1, 7)
    >>> modulo(1, 7) // modulo(3, 7)
    modulo(5, 7)
    >>> modulo(5, 7) ** 2
    modulo(4, 7)
    >>> modulo(5, 7) ** (-1)
    modulo(3, 7)

Individual congruence classes can be compared with one another according to their least nonnegative residues (and, thus, can also be sorted)::

    >>> mod(2, 7) < mod(3, 7)
    True
    >>> list(sorted([mod(2, 3), mod(1, 3), mod(0, 3)]))
    [modulo(0, 3), modulo(1, 3), modulo(2, 3)]

.. |len| replace:: ``len``
.. _len: https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html#len

A set of congruence classes such as a finite field can also be defined. The built-in length function |len|_ and the membership operator are supported::

    >>> len(modulo(7))
    7
    >>> modulo(3, 7) in modulo(7)
    True

.. |int| replace:: ``int``
.. _int: https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html#int

The built-in |int|_ function can be used to retrieve the least nonnegative residue of a congruence class and the built-in |len|_ function can be used to retrieve the modulus of a congruence class or set of congruence classes (this is the recommended approach)::

    >>> c = modulo(3, 7)
    >>> int(c)
    3
    >>> len(c)
    7

Congruence classes and sets of congruence classes are also hashable (making it possible to use them as dictionary keys and as set members) and iterable::

    >>> len({mod(0, 3), mod(1, 3), mod(2, 3)})
    3
    >>> list(mod(4))
    [modulo(0, 4), modulo(1, 4), modulo(2, 4), modulo(3, 4)]
    >>> from itertools import islice
    >>> list(islice(mod(3, 7), 5))
    [3, 10, 17, 24, 31]

The `Chinese remainder theorem <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_remainder_theorem>`__ can be applied to construct the intersection of two congruence classes as a congruence class (when it is possible to do so)::

    >>> mod(23, 100) & mod(31, 49)
    modulo(423, 4900)
    >>> mod(2, 10) & mod(4, 20) is None
    True

Some familiar forms of notation for referring to congruence classes (and sets thereof) are also supported::

    >>> Z/(23*Z)
    modulo(23)
    >>> 23*Z
    modulo(0, 23)
    >>> 17 + 23*Z
    modulo(17, 23)

Development
-----------
All installation and development dependencies are managed using `setuptools <https://pypi.org/project/setuptools>`__ and are fully specified in ``setup.py``. The ``extras_require`` parameter is used to `specify optional requirements <https://setuptools.pypa.io/en/latest/userguide/dependency_management.html#optional-dependencies>`__ for various development tasks. This makes it possible to specify additional options (such as ``docs``, ``lint``, and so on) when performing installation using `pip <https://pypi.org/project/pip>`__::

    python -m pip install .[docs,lint]

Documentation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^
.. include:: toc.rst

The documentation can be generated automatically from the source files using `Sphinx <https://www.sphinx-doc.org>`__::

    python -m pip install .[docs]
    cd docs
    sphinx-apidoc -f -E --templatedir=_templates -o _source .. ../setup.py && make html

Testing and Conventions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
All unit tests are executed and their coverage is measured when using `pytest <https://docs.pytest.org>`__ (see ``setup.cfg`` for configuration details)::

    python -m pip install .[test]
    nosetests --cover-erase

Alternatively, all unit tests are included in the module itself and can be executed using `doctest <https://docs.python.org/3/library/doctest.html>`__::

    python modulo/modulo.py -v

Style conventions are enforced using `Pylint <https://www.pylint.org>`__::

    python -m pip install .[lint]
    pylint modulo

Contributions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^
In order to contribute to the source code, open an issue or submit a pull request on the `GitHub page <https://github.com/lapets/modulo>`__ for this library.

Versioning
^^^^^^^^^^
Beginning with version 0.2.0, the version number format for this library and the changes to the library associated with version number increments conform with `Semantic Versioning 2.0.0 <https://semver.org/#semantic-versioning-200>`__.

Publishing
^^^^^^^^^^
This library can be published as a `package on PyPI <https://pypi.org/project/modulo>`__ by a package maintainer. First, install the dependencies required for packaging and publishing::

    python -m pip install .[publish]

Remove any old build/distribution files. Then, package the source into a distribution archive using the `wheel <https://pypi.org/project/wheel>`__ package::

    rm -rf dist *.egg-info
    python setup.py sdist bdist_wheel

Finally, upload the package distribution archive to `PyPI <https://pypi.org>`__ using the `twine <https://pypi.org/project/twine>`__ package::

    python -m twine upload dist/*

Commit message:

Add membership operation examples to README.

README.rst, after:

======
modulo
======

Pure-Python library for working with modular arithmetic, congruence classes, and finite fields.

|pypi| |readthedocs| |actions| |coveralls|

.. |pypi| image:: https://badge.fury.io/py/modulo.svg
   :target: https://badge.fury.io/py/modulo
   :alt: PyPI version and link.

.. |readthedocs| image:: https://readthedocs.org/projects/modulo-lib/badge/?version=latest
   :target: https://modulo-lib.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest
   :alt: Read the Docs documentation status.

.. |actions| image:: https://github.com/lapets/modulo/workflows/lint-test-cover-docs/badge.svg
   :target: https://github.com/lapets/modulo/actions/workflows/lint-test-cover-docs.yml
   :alt: GitHub Actions status.

.. |coveralls| image:: https://coveralls.io/repos/github/lapets/modulo/badge.svg?branch=main
   :target: https://coveralls.io/github/lapets/modulo?branch=main
   :alt: Coveralls test coverage summary.

Purpose
-------
The library allows users to work with congruence classes (including finite field elements) as objects, with support for many common operations.

Package Installation and Usage
------------------------------
This library is available as a `package on PyPI <https://pypi.org/project/modulo>`__::

    python -m pip install modulo

The library can be imported in the usual way::

    from modulo import modulo

Examples
^^^^^^^^
This library makes it possible to work with `congruence classes <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Congruence_relation>`__ (and sets of congruence classes such as finite fields) as objects. A congruence class is defined using a representative integer and a modulus::

    >>> from modulo import modulo
    >>> modulo(3, 7)
    modulo(3, 7)

Built-in operators can be used to perform modular addition, modular subtraction, and modular negation of congruence classes::

    >>> modulo(3, 7) + modulo(5, 7)
    modulo(1, 7)
    >>> modulo(1, 7) - modulo(4, 7)
    modulo(4, 7)
    >>> -modulo(5, 7)
    modulo(2, 7)

Modular multiplication, division, inversion, and exponentiation are also supported (when they are defined)::

    >>> modulo(3, 7) * modulo(5, 7)
    modulo(1, 7)
    >>> modulo(1, 7) // modulo(3, 7)
    modulo(5, 7)
    >>> modulo(5, 7) ** 2
    modulo(4, 7)
    >>> modulo(5, 7) ** (-1)
    modulo(3, 7)

Individual congruence classes can be compared with one another according to their least nonnegative residues (and, thus, can also be sorted)::

    >>> mod(2, 7) < mod(3, 7)
    True
    >>> list(sorted([mod(2, 3), mod(1, 3), mod(0, 3)]))
    [modulo(0, 3), modulo(1, 3), modulo(2, 3)]

The membership operation is supported between integers and congruence classes::

    >>> 3 in mod(3, 7)
    True
    >>> 10 in mod(3, 7)
    True
    >>> 4 in mod(3, 7)
    False

.. |len| replace:: ``len``
.. _len: https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html#len

A set of congruence classes such as a finite field can also be defined. The built-in length function |len|_ and the membership operator are supported::

    >>> len(modulo(7))
    7
    >>> modulo(3, 7) in modulo(7)
    True

.. |int| replace:: ``int``
.. _int: https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html#int

The built-in |int|_ function can be used to retrieve the least nonnegative residue of a congruence class and the built-in |len|_ function can be used to retrieve the modulus of a congruence class or set of congruence classes (this is the recommended approach)::

    >>> c = modulo(3, 7)
    >>> int(c)
    3
    >>> len(c)
    7

Congruence classes and sets of congruence classes are also hashable (making it possible to use them as dictionary keys and as set members) and iterable::

    >>> len({mod(0, 3), mod(1, 3), mod(2, 3)})
    3
    >>> list(mod(4))
    [modulo(0, 4), modulo(1, 4), modulo(2, 4), modulo(3, 4)]
    >>> from itertools import islice
    >>> list(islice(mod(3, 7), 5))
    [3, 10, 17, 24, 31]

The `Chinese remainder theorem <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_remainder_theorem>`__ can be applied to construct the intersection of two congruence classes as a congruence class (when it is possible to do so)::

    >>> mod(23, 100) & mod(31, 49)
    modulo(423, 4900)
    >>> mod(2, 10) & mod(4, 20) is None
    True

Some familiar forms of notation for referring to congruence classes (and sets thereof) are also supported::

    >>> Z/(23*Z)
    modulo(23)
    >>> 23*Z
    modulo(0, 23)
    >>> 17 + 23*Z
    modulo(17, 23)

Development
-----------
All installation and development dependencies are managed using `setuptools <https://pypi.org/project/setuptools>`__ and are fully specified in ``setup.py``. The ``extras_require`` parameter is used to `specify optional requirements <https://setuptools.pypa.io/en/latest/userguide/dependency_management.html#optional-dependencies>`__ for various development tasks. This makes it possible to specify additional options (such as ``docs``, ``lint``, and so on) when performing installation using `pip <https://pypi.org/project/pip>`__::

    python -m pip install .[docs,lint]

Documentation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^
.. include:: toc.rst

The documentation can be generated automatically from the source files using `Sphinx <https://www.sphinx-doc.org>`__::

    python -m pip install .[docs]
    cd docs
    sphinx-apidoc -f -E --templatedir=_templates -o _source .. ../setup.py && make html

Testing and Conventions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
All unit tests are executed and their coverage is measured when using `pytest <https://docs.pytest.org>`__ (see ``setup.cfg`` for configuration details)::

    python -m pip install .[test]
    nosetests --cover-erase

Alternatively, all unit tests are included in the module itself and can be executed using `doctest <https://docs.python.org/3/library/doctest.html>`__::

    python modulo/modulo.py -v

Style conventions are enforced using `Pylint <https://www.pylint.org>`__::

    python -m pip install .[lint]
    pylint modulo

Contributions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^
In order to contribute to the source code, open an issue or submit a pull request on the `GitHub page <https://github.com/lapets/modulo>`__ for this library.

Versioning
^^^^^^^^^^
Beginning with version 0.2.0, the version number format for this library and the changes to the library associated with version number increments conform with `Semantic Versioning 2.0.0 <https://semver.org/#semantic-versioning-200>`__.

Publishing
^^^^^^^^^^
This library can be published as a `package on PyPI <https://pypi.org/project/modulo>`__ by a package maintainer. First, install the dependencies required for packaging and publishing::

    python -m pip install .[publish]

Remove any old build/distribution files. Then, package the source into a distribution archive using the `wheel <https://pypi.org/project/wheel>`__ package::

    rm -rf dist *.egg-info
    python setup.py sdist bdist_wheel

Finally, upload the package distribution archive to `PyPI <https://pypi.org>`__ using the `twine <https://pypi.org/project/twine>`__ package::

    python -m twine upload dist/*
